Client auth methods for CLI, ZE (#4511)
zowe/docs-site: docs/user-guide/cli-authentication-methods.md

:::note Notes

- To apply your authentication method to a specific service, define the authentication type in the [service profile](../appendix/zowe-glossary.md#service-profile) of your choice.

- If you switch to a different authentication type, remove the previous authentication method from the profile it was stored in before.
:::

## Using basic authentication

The advantage of basic authentication is the simplicity of set up: In most cases you can use Zowe CLI (or Zowe Explorer) to connect to mainframe services without additional configuration on the server. Other authentication methods would likely require further configuration.

Basic authentication is the default authentication method defined in the default base profile when you issue the `zowe config init` command in Zowe CLI to create your team configuration.

If you change your authentication method and want to switch back to using basic authentication:

1. Use a text editor to update the `zowe.config.json` file to define the authentication as basic authentication (see the highlighted lines) in the base profile:
   ```json

>          "project_base": {

Reviewer: `project_base` is the default base profile name for a project team config but it could be different. Should we have a note mentioning that the default name is "global_base" for a global team config? The name could be anything if the base profile was renamed - if unsure the default base profile name can be found by running `zowe config list defaults`

               "type": "base",
               "properties": {...},
               "secure": [
   // highlight-start
                  "user",
                  "password"
   // highlight-end
               ]
         }
   ```

2. For Zowe CLI, issue commands to set the values for `user` and `password` in the end user's personal computer:

   ```

>    zowe config set profiles.base.properties.user

Reviewer 2: should be:
`zowe config set profiles.project_base.properties.user` 
and
`zowe config set profiles.project_base.properties.password`

        "properties": {
              // highlight-start
            "basePath": "/ibmzosmf/api/v1"
              // highlight-end
        }
    ```

     If you use the  `--show-token` option with the `login` command in Step 1, you must manually supply the token on each command using the `--token-value` option. For example:

     ```
     zowe zos-files list data-set <searchPattern> --token-value <123>
     ```
    - `data-set <searchPattern>`

        Specifies the data set search criteria (for example, `<IBMUSER.*>`)
    - `--token-value <123>`

        Specifies the token value supplied in Step 2.

:::note notes

* Tokens expire after a period of time defined by your security administrator. When a token expires, you must log in to API ML again to get a new token.
* If you omit connection details from a service profile, such as `zosmf` profile, the CLI uses the information from your base profile.
* You can choose to specify all connection details on a service profile and connect directly to the service. Routing through API ML is not required.

:::

### Logging in with a client certificate

Use a client certificate to generate a token and log in to API ML:

```

> zowe auth login apiml --host <APIML Host> --port <APIML Port> --cert-file <PEM Public Certificate Path> --cert-key-file <PEM Private Certificate Path>

Reviewer 2: Maybe for --cert-key-file, we should say <PEM Private Key File>.

```

- `--host <APIML Host>`

    Specifies the API ML host.
- `--port <APIML Port>`
    
    Specifies the API ML port.
- `--cert-file <PEM Public Certificate Path>`

    Specifies the path for the PEM public certificate.
- `--cert-key-file <PEM Private Certificate Path>`

>     Specifies the path to the PEM private certificate.

Reviewer 2: Line 163 and 165: `<PEM Private Key File Path>`

Reviewer 2: Line 171 should be changed to "Specifies the path to the PEM private key."

> Zowe CLI procures a security token from API ML and adds that token to the base profile in the applicable configuration file.

Reviewer 3: Maybe "obtains" would be better than "procures."

   ```json
         "project_base": {
            "type": "base",
            "properties": {
                  // highlight-start
                "tokenType": "apimlAuthenticationToken",
                   // highlight-end
                ...
            },
            "secure": [
                  // highlight-start
                "tokenValue"
                   // highlight-end
            ]
        }
   ``` 

:::note

> If you have multiple types of configuration files and base profiles, see [How configuration files and profiles work together](../user-guide/cli-using-understand-profiles-configs.md#how-configuration-files-and-profiles-work-together) to learn which configuration and profile would be used to store the API ML token.

Reviewer: We could also suggest here to see [Specifying a base profile](https://docs.zowe.org/stable/user-guide/cli-using-integrating-apiml/#specifying-a-base-profile) to learn how log in/out of a different base profile.

:::

### Logging out

> Log out to prompt the API ML token to expire and remove it from your base profile:

Reviewer 2: I would change to:
Log out to remove the token from your base profile and prompt the API ML to invalidate the token

```
zowe auth logout apiml
```

> This causes the token to expire. Log in again to obtain a new token.

Reviewer 2: I would say something like:
This command sends a request to the API ML to invalidate the token.

### Accessing a service through API ML

To access mainframe services with SSO through API ML using the token in your base profile, use the `basePath` property in your service profile to indicate the base path of the API on the API ML instance that you want to access.

To establish a base path, see instructions for [Zowe team configuration](#specifying-a-base-path-with-zowe-team-configuration).

:::note

Ensure that you *do not* provide username, password, host, or port directly on the service commands or profiles. Supplying those options causes the CLI to ignore the API ML token in your base profile and access the service directly.

:::

#### Specifying a base path with Zowe team configuration

Use the following steps to specify a base path with Zowe [team configuration](../appendix/zowe-glossary.md#team-configuration):

1. Note the complete path for a service registered to API ML.

    For example:

    ```
    https://myapilayerhost:port/<yourServiceId>/api/v1

    ```

    The format of base paths can vary based on how API ML is configured at your site.

> 2. Using the example in Step 1, access the API ML instance by creating or updating a [service profile](../user-guide/cli-using-using-team-profiles.md#zowe-cli-profile-types), or issuing a command, with the base path value of `<yourServiceId>/api/v1`. Your service profile uses the token and credentials stored in your default base profile.

Reviewer 2: Not sure it's worth mentioning, but regarding "Your service profile uses the token and credentials stored in your default base profile", the creds could also be stored in a parent profile.

Author: I think it's best to keep this on the simpler side please.

    To create or update a service profile with the preceding base path in a **project** team configuration file:

    ```
    zowe config set profiles.<yourService>.properties.basePath <basePath> 
    ```

>     If you are using a **global** team configuration file (located in your home directory), add `--global-config` to the end of the command.

Reviewer: It would be good to have this same note for the `zowe config set` commands in the Basic Auth and Certificate sections.

    Commands issued with this profile are routed through API ML to access an appropriate instance of your service.

#### Specifying a base path with Zowe V1 profiles

> See the [Integrating with API Mediation Layer](https://67c89aa5af702da5881fc564--zowe-docs-master.netlify.app/v1.28.x/user-guide/cli-usingcli#integrating-with-api-mediation-layer) Zowe V1 documentation.

Reviewer: This seems like V1 specific doc, should it be removed?

Reviewer: Can't they look at the V2.18 docs for that?

Author: I think we've talked about this during a meeting and decided to leave in links to archived content.

## Using client certificates

> Certificates are a long lasting type of authentication, rather than a password or token that can expires in hours, days, or months. A certificate is authenticated by matching a public and private key.

Reviewer 2: typo: "token that can expire**s** in hour..."

To use a client certificate for authentication:

> 1. Generate a file for the certificate that includes the public key:

Reviewer 2: Zowe CLI doesn't generate the files. With these commands we are configuring a profile with the paths to a public cert file and private key file.

   ```
   zowe config set profiles.base.properties.certFile <certPath> 
   ```

   - `<certPath>`
   
      Specifies the location on your computer where the certificate is stored.

2. Generate a file with the private key:
   ```
   zowe config set profiles.base.properties.certKeyFile <certKeyPath> 
   ```
      - `<certKeyPath>`
   
      Specifies the location on your computer where the private key is stored.

:::tip
Add the `--secure` option to the preceding commands to avoid saving certificate file paths as plain text in your configuration file.
:::

## Using multi-factor authentication (MFA)

MFA adds an extra layer of security because it requires users to supply their password and an additional verification method.

> In Zowe, MFA can apply to basic authentication and Single Sign-On set with username and password.

Reviewer 2: single sign-on should not be capitalized

> In Zowe, MFA can apply to basic authentication and single sign-on set with username and password.

Reviewer: "set with" sounds a bit weird to me, should we use more conventional terms like "logging in with"?
```suggestion
In Zowe, MFA can apply to basic authentication or single sign-on when logging in with username and password.
```

> It is important to understand how MFA functions at your site in order to set it up. Typically, a user needs an authenticator app to obtain a temporary code that is typically concatenated or appended to the password. The system administrator must configure the application so it is set up for a Zowe user.

Reviewer: "concatenated or appended to" seems redundant, should we say something like this?
```suggestion
It is important to understand how MFA functions at your site in order to set it up. Typically, a user needs an authenticator app to obtain a temporary code that is typically appended to the password or may replace it. The system administrator must configure the application so it is set up for a Zowe user.
```

    If you already created a base profile, you might not be prompted for the host and port.

3. If you do not have a profile for the service, respond to Zowe CLI prompts for connection information to create a profile for the service.

    :::tip
    - To establish a base path, see instructions for [Zowe team configuration](#specifying-a-base-path-with-zowe-team-configuration) or [Zowe V1 profiles](#specifying-a-base-path-with-zowe-v1-profiles).
    :::

    If you already have a profile in your configuration for the service you want to connect to, use a text editor to open the applicable configuration file and replace the `port` property with a `basePath` property to enable the use of API ML.

    A profile with a port number:

    ```json
        "type": "zosmf",
        "properties": {
            // highlight-start
            "port": 443
            // highlight-end
        }
    ```

    A profile with a base path:

    ```json
    "type": "zosmf",
        "properties": {
              // highlight-start
            "basePath": "/ibmzosmf/api/v1"
              // highlight-end
        }
    ```

>      If you use the  `--show-token` option with the `login` command in Step 1, you must manually supply the token on each command using the `--token-value` option. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     If you use the `--show-token` option with the `login` command in Step 1, you must manually supply the token on each command using the `--token-value` option. For example:
```

    Commands issued with this profile are routed through API ML to access an appropriate instance of your service.

#### Specifying a base path with Zowe V1 profiles

See the [Integrating with API Mediation Layer](https://67c89aa5af702da5881fc564--zowe-docs-master.netlify.app/v1.28.x/user-guide/cli-usingcli#integrating-with-api-mediation-layer) Zowe V1 documentation.

## Using client certificates

Certificates are a long lasting type of authentication, rather than a password or token that can expire in hours, days, or months. A certificate is authenticated by matching a public and private key.

To use a client certificate for authentication:

1. Configure the relevant profile with the paths to a public certificate file and private key file:

   ```
   zowe config set profiles.base.properties.certFile <certPath> 
   ```

   - `<certPath>`
   
      Specifies the location on your computer where the certificate is stored.
      
    If you are using a **global** team configuration file (located in your home directory), add `--global-config` to the end of the command.

> 2. Generate a file with the private key:

Reviewer 2: Rather than "Generate a file..." I would say something like "Configure the file path to the private key".
